Medicines in pregnancy

Most medicines taken during pregnancy cross the placenta and reach the baby.

Before taking any medicine when you're pregnant, including painkillers, check with your pharmacist, midwife or GP that it's suitable.

When deciding whether to take a medicine during pregnancy, it's important to find out about the possible effects of that medicine on your baby.

This is the case both for medicines prescribed by a doctor and for medicines you buy from a pharmacy or shop.

Which medicines are safe?

You can find out information on medicines in pregnancy on the bumps (best use of medicines in pregnancy) website.

They also have advice on what to do if you have already taken a medicine in pregnancy.

But it's also important to never stop taking a medicine that's been prescribed to keep you healthy without first checking with your doctor.

Stopping taking your medicine could be harmful to both you and your baby.

If you're trying for a baby or are already pregnant, it's important to always:

talk to your doctor immediately if you take regular medicine, ideally before you start trying for a baby or as soon as you find out you're pregnant
check with your doctor, midwife or pharmacist before taking any prescribed medicines or medicines that you have bought
make sure your doctor, dentist or another healthcare professional knows you're pregnant before they prescribe anything or give you treatment
If you cannot find information about a specific medicine on bumps, you can ask your doctor, midwife or pharmacist to contact the UK Teratology Information Service (UKTIS) for advice on your behalf.

Herbal and homeopathic remedies and aromatherapy in pregnancy

Not all "natural" remedies or complementary therapies are safe in pregnancy. 

Some products used may not be of a high quality and may contain other substances, such as lead, that could be harmful.

You're also advised not to take herbal remedies if you're trying to get pregnant.

Tell your midwife, doctor or pharmacist if you're using herbal, homeopathic or aromatherapy remedies or therapies.

If you do decide to use these therapies, you should always consult a qualified practitioner.

You should tell your practitioner that you're pregnant before discussing any treatment.

The Professional Standards Authority for Health and Social Care (PSA) provides information on qualified or registered practitioners.

Organisations with PSA-accredited voluntary registers include:

the Complementary & Natural Healthcare Council
the Federation of Holistic Therapists
Complementary remedies or therapies cannot replace conventional antenatal care.

It's important to go to all your regular antenatal check-ups throughout your pregnancy.




Have a healthy diet in pregnancy

A healthy diet is an important part of a healthy lifestyle at any time but is especially vital if you're pregnant or planning a pregnancy. Eating healthily during pregnancy will help your baby to develop and grow.

You do not need to go on a special diet, but it's important to eat a variety of different foods every day to get the right balance of nutrients that you and your baby need. 

It's best to get vitamins and minerals from the foods you eat, but when you're pregnant you need to take a folic acid supplement as well, to make sure you get everything you need.

Read more about vitamins and supplements in pregnancy. 

There are also certain foods that should be avoided in pregnancy.

There's no need to "eat for 2"

You will probably find that you are more hungry than usual, but you do not need to "eat for 2" – even if you are expecting twins or triplets.

Try to have a healthy breakfast every day, because this can help you to avoid snacking on foods that are high in fat and sugar.

Eating healthily often means changing the amounts of different foods you eat, so that your diet is varied, rather than cutting out all your favourites. You can use the Eatwell Guide to get the balance of your diet right. It shows you how much of what you eat should come from each food group to achieve a healthy, balanced diet.

You do not need to achieve this balance with every meal, but try to get the balance right over a week.

Fruit and vegetables in pregnancy

Eat plenty of fruit and vegetables because these provide vitamins and minerals, as well as fibre, which helps digestion and can help prevent constipation.

Eat at least 5 portions of a variety of fruit and vegetables every day – these can include fresh, frozen, canned, dried or juiced. Always wash fresh fruit and vegetables carefully.

Find out what counts as a portion of fruit or vegetables.

Starchy foods (carbohydrates) in pregnancy

Starchy foods are an important source of energy, some vitamins and fibre, and help you to feel full without containing too many calories. They include bread, potatoes, breakfast cereals, rice, pasta, noodles, maize, millet, oats, yams and cornmeal. If you are having chips, go for oven chips lower in fat and salt.

These foods should make up just over a 3rd of the food you eat. Instead of refined starchy (white) food, choose wholegrain or higher-fibre options such as wholewheat pasta, brown rice or simply leaving the skins on potatoes.

Protein in pregnancy

Eat some protein-rich foods every day. Sources of protein include:

beans
pulses
fish
eggs
meat (but avoid liver)
poultry
nuts
Choose lean meat, remove the skin from poultry, and try not to add extra fat or oil when cooking meat. Read more about eating meat in a healthy way.

Make sure poultry, burgers, sausages and whole cuts of meat such as lamb, beef and pork are cooked very thoroughly until steaming all the way through. Check that there is no pink meat, and that juices have no pink or red in them.

Try to eat 2 portions of fish each week, 1 of which should be oily fish such as salmon, sardines or mackerel. Find out about the health benefits of fish and shellfish. There are some types of fish you should avoid when you're pregnant or planning to get pregnant, including shark, swordfish and marlin.

When you're pregnant, you should avoid having more than 2 portions of oily fish a week, such as salmon, trout, mackerel and herring, because it can contain pollutants (toxins).

You should avoid eating some raw or partially cooked eggs, as there is a risk of salmonella.

Eggs produced under the British Lion Code of Practice are safe for pregnant women to eat raw or partially cooked, as they come from flocks that have been vaccinated against salmonella.

These eggs have a red lion logo stamped on their shell. Pregnant women can eat these raw or partially cooked (for example, soft boiled eggs).

Eggs that have not been produced under the Lion Code are considered less safe, and pregnant women are advised to avoid eating them raw or partially cooked, including in mousse, mayonnaise and soufflé. These eggs should be cooked until the white and the yolk are hard.

Find out more about foods to avoid in pregnancy.

Dairy in pregnancy

Dairy foods such as milk, cheese, fromage frais and yoghurt are important in pregnancy because they contain calcium and other nutrients that you and your baby need.

Choose low-fat varieties wherever possible, such as semi-skimmed, 1 percent fat or skimmed milk, low-fat and lower-sugar yoghurt and reduced-fat hard cheese.

If you prefer dairy alternatives, such as soya drinks and yoghurts, go for unsweetened, calcium-fortified versions.

Find out more about dairy and dairy alternatives.

There are some cheeses you should avoid in pregnancy, including unpasteurised cheeses. To find out which cheeses you should not eat when you're pregnant on our page about foods to avoid in pregnancy.

Foods that are high in fat, sugar or both

Sugary foods and drinks are often high in calories, which can contribute to weight gain. Having sugary foods and drinks can also lead to tooth decay. 

Fat is very high in calories, so eating too many fatty foods, or eating them too often, can make you put on weight. Eating too much saturated fat can also increase the amount of cholesterol in your blood, which increases your chance of developing heart disease.

Foods that are high in fat, sugar, or both, include:

all spreading fats (such as butter)
oils
salad dressings
cream
chocolate
crisps
biscuits
pastries
ice cream
cake
puddings
fizzy drinks
If you're having foods and drinks that are high in fat and sugar, have these less often and in small amounts. 

Try to cut down on saturated fat, and have small amounts of foods rich in unsaturated fat instead, such as vegetable oils. Find out about saturated and unsaturated fat.

Healthy snacks in pregnancy

If you get hungry between meals, try not to eat snacks that are high in fat and/or sugar, such as sweets, biscuits, crisps or chocolate. Instead, choose something healthier, such as:

small sandwiches or pitta bread with grated cheese, lean ham, mashed tuna, salmon, or sardines, with salad
salad vegetables, such as carrot, celery or cucumber
low-fat, lower-sugar fruit yoghurt, plain yoghurt or fromage frais with fruit
ready-to-eat apricots, figs or prunes
vegetable and bean soups
a small bowl of unsweetened breakfast cereal, or porridge, with milk
milky drinks
fresh fruit
baked beans on toast or a small baked potato
a small slice of malt loaf, a fruited tea cake or a slice of toasted fruit bread
When choosing snacks, you can use food labels to help you. Find out more about food labelling, including how the "green, amber, red" code can help you make healthier choices quickly.

Preparing food safely

Wash fruit, vegetables and salads to remove all traces of soil, which may contain toxoplasma (a parasite that can cause toxoplasmosis) which can harm your unborn baby.
Wash all surfaces and utensils, and your hands, after preparing raw foods (poultry, meat, eggs, fish, shellfish and raw vegetables) to help you avoid food poisoning.
Make sure that raw foods are stored separately from ready-to-eat foods, otherwise there's a risk of contamination.
Use a separate knife and chopping board for raw meats.
Heat ready meals until they're steaming hot all the way through – this is especially important for meals containing poultry.
Check the use-by date to make sure food is safe to eat – do not eat food after the use-by date even if it looks and smells ok.
You also need to make sure that some foods, such as eggs, poultry, burgers, sausages and whole cuts of meat like lamb, beef and pork, are cooked very thoroughly until steaming all the way through.

For tips, read foods to avoid in pregnancy.

The Healthy Start scheme

You may be able to get help to buy food and milk through the Healthy Start scheme if you're pregnant or have a child under 4 years old and receive certain benefits, or you're pregnant and under 18.

If you qualify, you'll be sent a Healthy Start card which you can use to buy certain types of milk, infant formula, fruit and vegetables.

For more information, or to apply for a card, visit the Healthy Start scheme website.

Get Better Health: Start for Life's pregnancy and baby emails

Sign up for Better Health: Start for Life's weekly emails for expert advice, videos and tips on pregnancy, birth and beyond.



Vegetarian or vegan and pregnant

Eating healthily during pregnancy is important for your own health and the health of your developing baby.

It's important to eat a varied and balanced diet during pregnancy to provide enough nutrients for you and the development and growth of your baby.

If you're pregnant and a vegetarian or vegan, you need to make sure you get enough iron and vitamin B12, which are mainly found in meat and fish, and vitamin D, calcium and iodine.

Iron in your diet

Good sources of iron for vegetarians and vegans include:

pulses
dark green vegetables
wholemeal bread and flour
nuts
fortified breakfast cereals (with added iron)
dried fruit, such as apricots
Vitamin B12 in your diet

Good sources of vitamin B12 for vegetarians include milk, cheese and eggs.

Good sources for vegans include:

breakfast cereals fortified with vitamin B12
unsweetened soya drinks fortified with vitamin B12
yeast extract, such as Marmite, and nutritional yeast flakes which are fortified with vitamin B12
Vitamin D in your diet

From late March or early April until the end of September, most people should be able to get enough vitamin D from sunlight.

Although we get vitamin D from sunlight, vegetarian food sources include:

egg yolk
foods fortified with vitamin D, including some breakfast cereals and fat spreads
dietary supplements
Because vitamin D is found only in a small number of foods, it is difficult to get enough from foods that naturally contain vitamin D and fortified foods alone.

That's why the government recommends that all adults, including those who are pregnant and breastfeeding, should consider taking a daily supplement containing 10 micrograms of vitamin D during the winter months (October until the end of March).

You may be at particular risk of not having enough vitamin D if:

you have brown or black skin (for example, if you're of African, African Caribbean or south Asian origin)
you cover your skin when outside or spend lots of time indoors
You may need to consider taking a daily supplement of vitamin D all year. Talk to a midwife or doctor for advice.

If you're vegan, check the label to make sure your vitamin D is suitable for vegans.

Calcium in your diet

If you're a vegan, you also need to make sure you get enough calcium. This is because non-vegans get most of their calcium from dairy foods.

Good sources of calcium for vegans include:

dark green leafy vegetables
pulses
fortified unsweetened soya, pea and oat drinks
brown and white bread
calcium-set tofu
sesame seeds and tahini
dried fruit
Talk to your midwife or doctor about how you can get all the nutrients you need for you and your baby.

Iodine in your diet

Good sources of iodine for vegetarians include cow's milk, dairy products and eggs.

Iodine can also be found in plant foods, such as cereals and grains, but the levels vary depending on the amount of iodine in the soil where the plants are grown.

If you're vegan then you may want to consider taking an iodine supplement or eating foods fortified with iodine, such as some types of plant-based drinks.




Foods to avoid in pregnancy

Most foods and drinks are safe to have during pregnancy. But there are some things you should be careful with or avoid.

Cheese, milk and other dairy
What you can eat

pasteurised milk, yoghurt, cream and ice cream
pasteurised or unpasteurised hard cheeses, such as cheddar, gruyere and parmesan
pasteurised semi-hard cheeses, such as edam
pasteurised soft cheeses, such as cottage cheese, mozzarella, feta, cream cheese, paneer, ricotta, halloumi, goats' cheese without a white coating on the outside (rind) and processed cheese spreads
soft or blue cheese (pasteurised or unpasteurised) that has been cooked until steaming hot
What to avoid

any other foods made from unpasteurised milk, such as soft ripened goats' cheese
pasteurised or unpasteurised mould-ripened soft cheeses with a white coating on the outside, such as brie, camembert and chèvre (unless cooked until steaming hot)
pasteurised or unpasteurised soft blue cheeses, such as danish blue, gorgonzola and roquefort (unless cooked until steaming hot)
unpasteurised cows' milk, goats' milk, sheep's milk or cream
Why

There's a small chance that unpasteurised or soft ripened dairy products may contain Listeria bacteria. This can cause an infection called listeriosis.

Listeriosis can lead to miscarriage or stillbirth, or make your newborn baby very unwell.

Soft cheeses with a white coating on the outside have more moisture. This can make it easier for bacteria to grow.

Cooking cheese until it's steaming hot kills bacteria, reducing the risk of listeriosis.
Meat and poultry
What you can eat

meats such as chicken, pork and beef, as long as they're well-cooked with no trace of pink or blood; be especially careful with poultry, pork, sausages and burgers
cold, pre-packed meats such as ham and corned beef
What to be careful with

cold cured meats, such as salami, pepperoni, chorizo and prosciutto (unless cooked thoroughly)
What to avoid

raw or undercooked meat
liver and liver products
all types of pâté, including vegetarian pâté
game meats such as goose, partridge or pheasant
Why

There's a small risk of getting toxoplasmosis if you eat raw and undercooked meat, which can cause miscarriage.

Cured meats are not cooked, so they may have parasites in them that cause toxoplasmosis.

Liver and liver products have lots of vitamin A in them. This can be harmful to an unborn baby.

Game meats may contain lead shot.
Eggs
What you can eat

raw, partially cooked and fully cooked British Lion hen eggs (they have a lion stamp on them) and hen eggs produced under the Laid in Britain scheme
foods made with raw hen egg, such as mousse and mayonnaise, if made with British Lion eggs or hen eggs produced under the Laid in Britain scheme
well cooked eggs (white and yolk) from any hen eggs that are not British Lion eggs or produced under the Laid in Britain scheme
well cooked eggs (white and yolk) of all other eggs, including duck, goose or quail
What to avoid

raw or partially cooked hen eggs that are not British Lion or produced under the Laid in Britain scheme
raw or partially cooked duck, goose or quail eggs
Why

British Lion hen eggs and hen eggs produced under the Laid in Britain scheme are less likely to have salmonella in them.

Salmonella is unlikely to harm your unborn baby, but you could get food poisoning.

You should cook all eggs thoroughly, unless they are British Lion hen eggs or hen eggs produced under the Laid in Britain scheme.
Fish
What you can eat

cooked fish and seafood
sushi, as long as the fish has been cooked thoroughly
cooked shellfish, such as mussels, lobster, crab, prawns, scallops and clams
What to limit

you should eat no more than 2 portions of oily fish a week, such as salmon, trout, mackerel or herring
you should eat no more than 2 tuna steaks (about 140g cooked or 170g raw) or 4 medium-size cans of tuna (about 140g when drained) per week
Information:
Tuna does not count as an oily fish

You can have 2 tuna steaks, or 4 medium-size cans of fish, as well as 2 portions of oily fish a week.
What to avoid

swordfish
marlin
shark
raw shellfish
cold-smoked or cured fish (for example smoked salmon or gravlax, including in sushi), unless it has been cooked until steaming hot
Why

You should avoid ready-to-eat cold-smoked or cured fish because it could be contaminated with listeria bacteria. These bacteria can cause an infection called listeriosis, which can lead to miscarriage or stillbirth, or make your newborn baby seriously ill. Cooking smoked or cured fish until it's steaming hot will kill any bacteria that may be present.

You should limit tuna because it has more mercury in it than other fish. If you eat too much mercury, it can be harmful to your unborn baby.

You should limit oily fish because they can have pollutants such as dioxins and polychlorinated biphenyls in them. If you eat too much of these, they can be harmful to your unborn baby.

You should avoid raw shellfish because they can have harmful bacteria, viruses or toxins in them. These can make you unwell and give you food poisoning.
Other foods and drinks
Caffeine

You can have caffeine, but no more than 200mg per day. Regularly drinking more than this amount can increase your risk of pregnancy complications, such as low birthweight, and even miscarriage.

There is:

100mg in a mug of instant coffee
140mg in a mug of filter coffee
75mg in a mug of tea (green tea can have the same amount of caffeine as regular tea)
40mg in a can of cola
80mg in a 250ml can of energy drink
less than 25mg in a 50g bar of plain dark chocolate
less than 10mg in a 50g bar of plain milk chocolate
Herbal teas

The caffeine content can vary quite widely between different brands of herbal tea. Some contain no caffeine, while others may have quite high levels.

Check the ingredients label on the packet to see how much caffeine is in a brand. Some of the herbs used in herbal tea can also be potentially dangerous if you have a lot of them during pregnancy; especially during weeks 1 to 12 (first trimester).

As a general rule, if you drink no more than 1 to 2 cups of herbal tea a day during your pregnancy, you should be fine.

Alcohol

Drinking alcohol in pregnancy can lead to long-term harm to your baby.

If you're pregnant or planning to get pregnant, the safest approach is to not drink alcohol at all.

This keeps risks to your baby to a minimum.

Liquorice

Liquorice is safe to eat. But you should avoid liquorice root.

Fruits, vegetables and salads

Be careful with fruits, vegetables and salads as they can have soil on them, which can make you unwell.

Make sure to thoroughly wash all fruits, vegetables and salad ingredients.

Enoki mushrooms

There's a chance that enoki mushrooms may contain Listeria bacteria. This can cause an infection called listeriosis.

Listeriosis can lead to miscarriage or stillbirth, or make your newborn baby very unwell.

Cooking enoki mushrooms thoroughly kills bacteria, reducing the risk of listeriosis. Enoki mushrooms should be stored in the fridge before use.

When preparing enoki mushrooms, wash your hands regularly with soap and warm water, and clean any surfaces and utensils used.

Peanuts

You do not need to avoid eating peanuts when you're pregnant.

Only avoid eating peanuts if you're advised to by a healthcare professional, or if you have a nut allergy.

Vitamins

Do not take high-dose multivitamin supplements, or any supplements with vitamin A in them.






medicine from wikipedia


This article is about the science of healing. For other uses, see Medicine (disambiguation).
"Medical" redirects here. A "medical" is also an informal term in some places for a medical examination.
Medicine is the science[1] and practice[2] of caring for patients, managing the diagnosis, prognosis, prevention, treatment, palliation of their injury or disease, and promoting their health. Medicine encompasses a variety of health care practices evolved to maintain and restore health by the prevention and treatment of illness. Contemporary medicine applies biomedical sciences, biomedical research, genetics, and medical technology to diagnose, treat, and prevent injury and disease, typically through pharmaceuticals or surgery, but also through therapies as diverse as psychotherapy, external splints and traction, medical devices, biologics, and ionizing radiation, amongst others.[3]

Medicine has been practiced since prehistoric times, and for most of this time it was an art (an area of creativity and skill), frequently having connections to the religious and philosophical beliefs of local culture. For example, a medicine man would apply herbs and say prayers for healing, or an ancient philosopher and physician would apply bloodletting according to the theories of humorism. In recent centuries, since the advent of modern science, most medicine has become a combination of art and science (both basic and applied, under the umbrella of medical science). For example, while stitching technique for sutures is an art learned through practice, knowledge of what happens at the cellular and molecular level in the tissues being stitched arises through science.

Prescientific forms of medicine, now known as traditional medicine or folk medicine, remain commonly used in the absence of scientific medicine and are thus called alternative medicine. Alternative treatments outside of scientific medicine with ethical, safety and efficacy concerns are termed quackery.

Etymology
Medicine (UK: /ˈmɛdsɪn/ ⓘ, US: /ˈmɛdɪsɪn/ ⓘ) is the science and practice of the diagnosis, prognosis, treatment, and prevention of disease.[4][5] The word "medicine" is derived from Latin medicus, meaning "a physician".[a][7] The word "physic" itself, from which "physician" derives, was the old word for what is now called a medicine, and also the field of medicine.[8]

Clinical practice
Oil painting of medicine in the age of colonialism
The Doctor by Sir Luke Fildes (1891)

Elizabeth Blackwell, the first female physician in the United States graduated from SUNY Upstate (1847)
Medical availability and clinical practice vary across the world due to regional differences in culture and technology. Modern scientific medicine is highly developed in the Western world, while in developing countries such as parts of Africa or Asia, the population may rely more heavily on traditional medicine with limited evidence and efficacy and no required formal training for practitioners.[9]

In the developed world, evidence-based medicine is not universally used in clinical practice; for example, a 2007 survey of literature reviews found that about 49% of the interventions lacked sufficient evidence to support either benefit or harm.[10]

In modern clinical practice, physicians and physician assistants personally assess patients to diagnose, prognose, treat, and prevent disease using clinical judgment. The doctor-patient relationship typically begins with an interaction with an examination of the patient's medical history and medical record, followed by a medical interview[11] and a physical examination. Basic diagnostic medical devices (e.g., stethoscope, tongue depressor) are typically used. After examining for signs and interviewing for symptoms, the doctor may order medical tests (e.g., blood tests), take a biopsy, or prescribe pharmaceutical drugs or other therapies. Differential diagnosis methods help to rule out conditions based on the information provided. During the encounter, properly informing the patient of all relevant facts is an important part of the relationship and the development of trust. The medical encounter is then documented in the medical record, which is a legal document in many jurisdictions.[12] Follow-ups may be shorter but follow the same general procedure, and specialists follow a similar process. The diagnosis and treatment may take only a few minutes or a few weeks, depending on the complexity of the issue.

The components of the medical interview[11] and encounter are:

Chief complaint (CC): the reason for the current medical visit. These are the symptoms. They are in the patient's own words and are recorded along with the duration of each one. Also called chief concern or presenting complaint.
Current activity: occupation, hobbies, what the patient actually does.
Family history (FH): listing of diseases in the family that may impact the patient. A family tree is sometimes used.
History of present illness (HPI): the chronological order of events of symptoms and further clarification of each symptom. Distinguishable from history of previous illness, often called past medical history (PMH). Medical history comprises HPI and PMH.
Medications (Rx): what drugs the patient takes including prescribed, over-the-counter, and home remedies, as well as alternative and herbal medicines or remedies. Allergies are also recorded.
Past medical history (PMH/PMHx): concurrent medical problems, past hospitalizations and operations, injuries, past infectious diseases or vaccinations, history of known allergies.
Review of systems (ROS) or systems inquiry: a set of additional questions to ask, which may be missed on HPI: a general enquiry (have you noticed any weight loss, change in sleep quality, fevers, lumps and bumps? etc.), followed by questions on the body's main organ systems (heart, lungs, digestive tract, urinary tract, etc.).
Social history (SH): birthplace, residences, marital history, social and economic status, habits (including diet, medications, tobacco, alcohol).
The physical examination is the examination of the patient for medical signs of disease that are objective and observable, in contrast to symptoms that are volunteered by the patient and are not necessarily objectively observable.[13] The healthcare provider uses sight, hearing, touch, and sometimes smell (e.g., in infection, uremia, diabetic ketoacidosis). Four actions are the basis of physical examination: inspection, palpation (feel), percussion (tap to determine resonance characteristics), and auscultation (listen), generally in that order, although auscultation occurs prior to percussion and palpation for abdominal assessments.[14]

The clinical examination involves the study of:[15]

Abdomen and rectum
Cardiovascular (heart and blood vessels)
General appearance of the patient and specific indicators of disease (nutritional status, presence of jaundice, pallor or clubbing)
Genitalia (and pregnancy if the patient is or could be pregnant)
Head, eye, ear, nose, and throat (HEENT)[15]
Musculoskeletal (including spine and extremities)
Neurological (consciousness, awareness, brain, vision, cranial nerves, spinal cord and peripheral nerves)
Psychiatric (orientation, mental state, mood, evidence of abnormal perception or thought).
Respiratory (large airways and lungs)[15]
Skin
Vital signs including height, weight, body temperature, blood pressure, pulse, respiration rate, and hemoglobin oxygen saturation[15]
It is to likely focus on areas of interest highlighted in the medical history and may not include everything listed above.

The treatment plan may include ordering additional medical laboratory tests and medical imaging studies, starting therapy, referral to a specialist, or watchful observation. A follow-up may be advised. Depending upon the health insurance plan and the managed care system, various forms of "utilization review", such as prior authorization of tests, may place barriers on accessing expensive services.[16]

The medical decision-making (MDM) process includes the analysis and synthesis of all the above data to come up with a list of possible diagnoses (the differential diagnoses), along with an idea of what needs to be done to obtain a definitive diagnosis that would explain the patient's problem.

On subsequent visits, the process may be repeated in an abbreviated manner to obtain any new history, symptoms, physical findings, lab or imaging results, or specialist consultations.

Institutions
Color fresco of an ancient hospital setting
The Hospital of Santa Maria della Scala, fresco by Domenico di Bartolo, 1441–1442
Contemporary medicine is, in general, conducted within health care systems. Legal, credentialing, and financing frameworks are established by individual governments, augmented on occasion by international organizations, such as churches. The characteristics of any given health care system have a significant impact on the way medical care is provided.

From ancient times, Christian emphasis on practical charity gave rise to the development of systematic nursing and hospitals, and the Catholic Church today remains the largest non-government provider of medical services in the world.[17] Advanced industrial countries (with the exception of the United States)[18][19] and many developing countries provide medical services through a system of universal health care that aims to guarantee care for all through a single-payer health care system or compulsory private or cooperative health insurance. This is intended to ensure that the entire population has access to medical care on the basis of need rather than ability to pay. Delivery may be via private medical practices, state-owned hospitals and clinics, or charities, most commonly a combination of all three.

Most tribal societies provide no guarantee of healthcare for the population as a whole. In such societies, healthcare is available to those who can afford to pay for it, have self-insured it (either directly or as part of an employment contract), or may be covered by care financed directly by the government or tribe.

collection of glass bottles of different sizes
Modern drug ampoules
Transparency of information is another factor defining a delivery system. Access to information on conditions, treatments, quality, and pricing greatly affects the choice of patients/consumers and, therefore, the incentives of medical professionals. While the US healthcare system has come under fire for its lack of openness,[20] new legislation may encourage greater openness. There is a perceived tension between the need for transparency on the one hand and such issues as patient confidentiality and the possible exploitation of information for commercial gain on the other.

The health professionals who provide care in medicine comprise multiple professions, such as medics, nurses, physiotherapists, and psychologists. These professions will have their own ethical standards, professional education, and bodies. The medical profession has been conceptualized from a sociological perspective.[21]

Delivery
See also: Health care, clinic, hospital, and hospice
Provision of medical care is classified into primary, secondary, and tertiary care categories.[22]

photograph of three nurses
Nurses in Kokopo, East New Britain, Papua New Guinea
Primary care medical services are provided by physicians, physician assistants, nurse practitioners, or other health professionals who have first contact with a patient seeking medical treatment or care.[23] These occur in physician offices, medical practices, clinics, nursing homes, schools, patients' homes, and in other places that are typically geographically close to where patients live, work or study. About 90% of medical visits can be satisfactorily and effectively dealt with by primary care provider(s).[citation needed] Primary care visits might include treatment of minor, acute or chronic illnesses, preventive care, and health education. Primary care is directed to the health of entire populations and thus providers care for patients of all ages and sexes.

Secondary care medical services are provided by medical specialists in their offices, practices or clinics, or at local community hospitals, to patients referred by the primary care provider who first diagnosed or treated the patient.[24] 'Referrals' are made of those patients who required the particular expertise of, or specific procedures performed by, specialists. Secondary care services include both ambulatory care and inpatient services, emergency departments, some intensive care medicine, some surgeries and related services, physical therapy, labor and delivery, endoscopy units, diagnostic laboratory and medical imaging services, hospice centers, and others depending on the health services systems within which the care is being delivered. Some primary care providers may also take care of hospitalized patients and deliver babies in a secondary care setting.

Tertiary care medical services are provided by specialist teams of providers in larger, more specialised hospitals or regional medical centers, which are equipped with diagnostic and treatment facilities not typically available at local (often smaller) hospitals. This allows for the treatment and care of patients with more complex or urgent or serious medical conditions, which in turn may require more expertise (including multi-disciplinary teams) and resources (facilities, staff, bed days) to effectively treat. Tertiary care may include that provided at burn treatment or trauma centers, advanced neonatology unit services, organ transplants, high-risk pregnancy and child delivery, radiation oncology, and very many other forms of specialist and intensive care.

Modern medical care also depends on the keeping and use of information, including about a particular patient—still kept in many health care settings on paper 'medical records', but increasingly nowadays by electronic means.

In low-income countries, modern healthcare is often too expensive for the average person. International healthcare policy researchers have advocated that "user fees" be removed in these areas to ensure access; however, even with removal of patient fee obligations, significant costs and barriers remain for the poor and the sick in accessing sufficient care.[25]

Separation of prescribing and dispensing is a practice in medicine and pharmacy in which the physician who provides a medical prescription is different from the pharmacist who provides the prescription drug to the patient. In the Western world there are centuries of tradition and practice differentiating pharmacists from physicians, and two quite separate professions developed. In many Asian countries, on the other hand, it is traditional for physicians to also deliver drugs directly to patients, at least in some cases.[26] This model is also being used increasingly in the west: especially for simply-treated conditions (eg, those needing general antibiotics), in remote locations, with vulnerable communities of patients, and in small or integrated medical facilities.

Branches

Drawing by Marguerite Martyn (1918) of a visiting nurse in St. Louis, Missouri, with medicine and babies
Working together as an interdisciplinary team, many highly trained health professionals besides medical practitioners are involved in the delivery of modern health care. Examples include: nurses, emergency medical technicians and paramedics, laboratory scientists, pharmacists, podiatrists, physiotherapists, respiratory therapists, speech therapists, occupational therapists, radiographers, dietitians, and bioengineers, medical physicists, surgeons, surgeon's assistant, surgical technologist.

The scope and sciences underpinning human medicine overlap many other fields. A patient admitted to the hospital is usually under the care of a specific team based on their main presenting problem, e.g., the cardiology team, who then may interact with other specialties, e.g., surgical, radiology, to help diagnose or treat the main problem or any subsequent complications/developments.

Physicians have many specializations and subspecializations into certain branches of medicine, which are listed below. There are variations from country to country regarding which specialties certain subspecialties are in.

The main branches of medicine are:

Basic sciences of medicine; this is what every physician is educated in, and some return to in biomedical research.
Interdisciplinary fields, where different medical specialties are mixed to function in certain occasions.
Medical specialties
Basic sciences
Anatomy is the study of the physical structure of organisms. In contrast to macroscopic or gross anatomy, cytology and histology are concerned with microscopic structures.
Biochemistry is the study of the chemistry taking place in living organisms, especially the structure and function of their chemical components.
Biomechanics is the study of the structure and function of biological systems by means of the methods of Mechanics.
Biophysics is an interdisciplinary science that uses the methods of physics and physical chemistry to study biological systems.
Biostatistics is the application of statistics to biological fields in the broadest sense. A knowledge of biostatistics is essential in the planning, evaluation, and interpretation of medical research. It is also fundamental to epidemiology and evidence-based medicine.
Cytology is the microscopic study of individual cells.

Louis Pasteur, as portrayed in his laboratory, 1885 by Albert Edelfelt

Statue of Robert Koch in Berlin
Embryology is the study of the early development of organisms.
Endocrinology is the study of hormones and their effect throughout the body of animals.
Epidemiology is the study of the demographics of disease processes, and includes, but is not limited to, the study of epidemics.
Genetics is the study of genes, and their role in biological inheritance.
Gynecology is the study of female reproductive system.
Histology is the study of the structures of biological tissues by light microscopy, electron microscopy and immunohistochemistry.
Immunology is the study of the immune system, which includes the innate and adaptive immune system in humans, for example.
Lifestyle medicine is the study of the chronic conditions, and how to prevent, treat and reverse them.
Medical physics is the study of the applications of physics principles in medicine.
Microbiology is the study of microorganisms, including protozoa, bacteria, fungi, and viruses.
Molecular biology is the study of molecular underpinnings of the process of replication, transcription and translation of the genetic material.
Neuroscience includes those disciplines of science that are related to the study of the nervous system. A main focus of neuroscience is the biology and physiology of the human brain and spinal cord. Some related clinical specialties include neurology, neurosurgery and psychiatry.
Nutrition science (theoretical focus) and dietetics (practical focus) is the study of the relationship of food and drink to health and disease, especially in determining an optimal diet. Medical nutrition therapy is done by dietitians and is prescribed for diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, weight and eating disorders, allergies, malnutrition, and neoplastic diseases.
Pathology as a science is the study of disease – the causes, course, progression and resolution thereof.
Pharmacology is the study of drugs and their actions.
Photobiology is the study of the interactions between non-ionizing radiation and living organisms.
Physiology is the study of the normal functioning of the body and the underlying regulatory mechanisms.
Radiobiology is the study of the interactions between ionizing radiation and living organisms.
Toxicology is the study of hazardous effects of drugs and poisons.
Specialties
Main article: Medical specialty
Globe icon.
The examples and perspective in this section deal primarily with UK and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this section, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new section, as appropriate. (February 2023) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
In the broadest meaning of "medicine", there are many different specialties. In the UK, most specialities have their own body or college, which has its own entrance examination. These are collectively known as the Royal Colleges, although not all currently use the term "Royal". The development of a speciality is often driven by new technology (such as the development of effective anaesthetics) or ways of working (such as emergency departments); the new specialty leads to the formation of a unifying body of doctors and the prestige of administering their own examination.

Within medical circles, specialities usually fit into one of two broad categories: "Medicine" and "Surgery". "Medicine" refers to the practice of non-operative medicine, and most of its subspecialties require preliminary training in Internal Medicine. In the UK, this was traditionally evidenced by passing the examination for the Membership of the Royal College of Physicians (MRCP) or the equivalent college in Scotland or Ireland. "Surgery" refers to the practice of operative medicine, and most subspecialties in this area require preliminary training in General Surgery, which in the UK leads to membership of the Royal College of Surgeons of England (MRCS). At present, some specialties of medicine do not fit easily into either of these categories, such as radiology, pathology, or anesthesia. Most of these have branched from one or other of the two camps above; for example anaesthesia developed first as a faculty of the Royal College of Surgeons (for which MRCS/FRCS would have been required) before becoming the Royal College of Anaesthetists and membership of the college is attained by sitting for the examination of the Fellowship of the Royal College of Anesthetists (FRCA).

Surgical specialty
Main article: Surgery

Surgeons in an operating room
Surgery is an ancient medical specialty that uses operative manual and instrumental techniques on a patient to investigate or treat a pathological condition such as disease or injury, to help improve bodily function or appearance or to repair unwanted ruptured areas (for example, a perforated ear drum). Surgeons must also manage pre-operative, post-operative, and potential surgical candidates on the hospital wards. In some centers, anesthesiology is part of the division of surgery (for historical and logistical reasons), although it is not a surgical discipline. Other medical specialties may employ surgical procedures, such as ophthalmology and dermatology, but are not considered surgical sub-specialties per se.

Surgical training in the U.S. requires a minimum of five years of residency after medical school. Sub-specialties of surgery often require seven or more years. In addition, fellowships can last an additional one to three years. Because post-residency fellowships can be competitive, many trainees devote two additional years to research. Thus in some cases surgical training will not finish until more than a decade after medical school. Furthermore, surgical training can be very difficult and time-consuming.

Surgical subspecialties include those a physician may specialize in after undergoing general surgery residency training as well as several surgical fields with separate residency training. Surgical subspecialties that one may pursue following general surgery residency training: [27]

Bariatric surgery
Cardiovascular surgery – may also be pursued through a separate cardiovascular surgery residency track
Colorectal surgery
Endocrine surgery
General surgery
Hand surgery
Hepatico-Pancreatico-Biliary Surgery
Minimally invasive surgery
Pediatric surgery
Plastic surgery – may also be pursued through a separate plastic surgery residency track
Surgical critical care
Surgical oncology
Transplant surgery
Trauma surgery
Vascular surgery – may also be pursued through a separate vascular surgery residency track
Other surgical specialties within medicine with their own individual residency training:

Dermatology
Neurosurgery
Ophthalmology
Oral and maxillofacial surgery
Orthopedic surgery
Otorhinolaryngology
Podiatric surgery – do not undergo medical school training, but rather separate training in podiatry school
Urology
Internal medicine specialty
Main article: Internal medicine
Internal medicine is the medical specialty dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of adult diseases.[28] According to some sources, an emphasis on internal structures is implied.[29] In North America, specialists in internal medicine are commonly called "internists". Elsewhere, especially in Commonwealth nations, such specialists are often called physicians.[30] These terms, internist or physician (in the narrow sense, common outside North America), generally exclude practitioners of gynecology and obstetrics, pathology, psychiatry, and especially surgery and its subspecialities.

Because their patients are often seriously ill or require complex investigations, internists do much of their work in hospitals. Formerly, many internists were not subspecialized; such general physicians would see any complex nonsurgical problem; this style of practice has become much less common. In modern urban practice, most internists are subspecialists: that is, they generally limit their medical practice to problems of one organ system or to one particular area of medical knowledge. For example, gastroenterologists and nephrologists specialize respectively in diseases of the gut and the kidneys.[31]

In the Commonwealth of Nations and some other countries, specialist pediatricians and geriatricians are also described as specialist physicians (or internists) who have subspecialized by age of patient rather than by organ system. Elsewhere, especially in North America, general pediatrics is often a form of primary care.

There are many subspecialities (or subdisciplines) of internal medicine:

Angiology/Vascular Medicine
Bariatrics
Cardiology
Critical care medicine
Endocrinology
Gastroenterology
Geriatrics
Hematology
Hepatology
Infectious disease
Nephrology
Neurology
Oncology
Pediatrics
Pulmonology/Pneumology/Respirology/chest medicine
Rheumatology
Sports Medicine
Training in internal medicine (as opposed to surgical training), varies considerably across the world: see the articles on medical education for more details. In North America, it requires at least three years of residency training after medical school, which can then be followed by a one- to three-year fellowship in the subspecialties listed above. In general, resident work hours in medicine are less than those in surgery, averaging about 60 hours per week in the US. This difference does not apply in the UK where all doctors are now required by law to work less than 48 hours per week on average.

Diagnostic specialties
Clinical laboratory sciences are the clinical diagnostic services that apply laboratory techniques to diagnosis and management of patients. In the United States, these services are supervised by a pathologist. The personnel that work in these medical laboratory departments are technically trained staff who do not hold medical degrees, but who usually hold an undergraduate medical technology degree, who actually perform the tests, assays, and procedures needed for providing the specific services. Subspecialties include transfusion medicine, cellular pathology, clinical chemistry, hematology, clinical microbiology and clinical immunology.
Clinical neurophysiology is concerned with testing the physiology or function of the central and peripheral aspects of the nervous system. These kinds of tests can be divided into recordings of: (1) spontaneous or continuously running electrical activity, or (2) stimulus evoked responses. Subspecialties include electroencephalography, electromyography, evoked potential, nerve conduction study and polysomnography. Sometimes these tests are performed by techs without a medical degree, but the interpretation of these tests is done by a medical professional.
Diagnostic radiology is concerned with imaging of the body, e.g. by x-rays, x-ray computed tomography, ultrasonography, and nuclear magnetic resonance tomography. Interventional radiologists can access areas in the body under imaging for an intervention or diagnostic sampling.
Nuclear medicine is concerned with studying human organ systems by administering radiolabelled substances (radiopharmaceuticals) to the body, which can then be imaged outside the body by a gamma camera or a PET scanner. Each radiopharmaceutical consists of two parts: a tracer that is specific for the function under study (e.g., neurotransmitter pathway, metabolic pathway, blood flow, or other), and a radionuclide (usually either a gamma-emitter or a positron emitter). There is a degree of overlap between nuclear medicine and radiology, as evidenced by the emergence of combined devices such as the PET/CT scanner.
Pathology as a medical specialty is the branch of medicine that deals with the study of diseases and the morphologic, physiologic changes produced by them. As a diagnostic specialty, pathology can be considered the basis of modern scientific medical knowledge and plays a large role in evidence-based medicine. Many modern molecular tests such as flow cytometry, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), immunohistochemistry, cytogenetics, gene rearrangements studies and fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) fall within the territory of pathology.
Other major specialties
The following are some major medical specialties that do not directly fit into any of the above-mentioned groups:

Anesthesiology (also known as anaesthetics): concerned with the perioperative management of the surgical patient. The anesthesiologist's role during surgery is to prevent derangement in the vital organs' (i.e. brain, heart, kidneys) functions and postoperative pain. Outside of the operating room, the anesthesiology physician also serves the same function in the labor and delivery ward, and some are specialized in critical medicine.
Emergency medicine is concerned with the diagnosis and treatment of acute or life-threatening conditions, including trauma, surgical, medical, pediatric, and psychiatric emergencies.
Family medicine, family practice, general practice or primary care is, in many countries, the first port-of-call for patients with non-emergency medical problems. Family physicians often provide services across a broad range of settings including office based practices, emergency department coverage, inpatient care, and nursing home care.

Gynecologist Michel Akotionga of Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso
Medical genetics is concerned with the diagnosis and management of hereditary disorders.
Neurology is concerned with diseases of the nervous system. In the UK, neurology is a subspecialty of general medicine.
Obstetrics and gynecology (often abbreviated as OB/GYN (American English) or Obs & Gynae (British English)) are concerned respectively with childbirth and the female reproductive and associated organs. Reproductive medicine and fertility medicine are generally practiced by gynecological specialists.
Pediatrics (AE) or paediatrics (BE) is devoted to the care of infants, children, and adolescents. Like internal medicine, there are many pediatric subspecialties for specific age ranges, organ systems, disease classes, and sites of care delivery.
Pharmaceutical medicine is the medical scientific discipline concerned with the discovery, development, evaluation, registration, monitoring and medical aspects of marketing of medicines for the benefit of patients and public health.
Physical medicine and rehabilitation (or physiatry) is concerned with functional improvement after injury, illness, or congenital disorders.
Podiatric medicine is the study of, diagnosis, and medical and surgical treatment of disorders of the foot, ankle, lower limb, hip and lower back.
Preventive medicine is the branch of medicine concerned with preventing disease.
Community health or public health is an aspect of health services concerned with threats to the overall health of a community based on population health analysis.
Psychiatry is the branch of medicine concerned with the bio-psycho-social study of the etiology, diagnosis, treatment and prevention of cognitive, perceptual, emotional and behavioral disorders. Related fields include psychotherapy and clinical psychology.
Interdisciplinary fields
Some interdisciplinary sub-specialties of medicine include:

Addiction medicine deals with the treatment of addiction.
Aerospace medicine deals with medical problems related to flying and space travel.
Biomedical Engineering is a field dealing with the application of engineering principles to medical practice.
Clinical pharmacology is concerned with how systems of therapeutics interact with patients.
Conservation medicine studies the relationship between human and non-human animal health, and environmental conditions. Also known as ecological medicine, environmental medicine, or medical geology.
Disaster medicine deals with medical aspects of emergency preparedness, disaster mitigation and management.
Diving medicine (or hyperbaric medicine) is the prevention and treatment of diving-related problems.
Evolutionary medicine is a perspective on medicine derived through applying evolutionary theory.
Forensic medicine deals with medical questions in legal context, such as determination of the time and cause of death, type of weapon used to inflict trauma, reconstruction of the facial features using remains of deceased (skull) thus aiding identification.
Gender-based medicine studies the biological and physiological differences between the human sexes and how that affects differences in disease.
Health informatics is a relatively recent field that deal with the application of computers and information technology to medicine.
Hospice and Palliative Medicine is a relatively modern branch of clinical medicine that deals with pain and symptom relief and emotional support in patients with terminal illnesses including cancer and heart failure.
Hospital medicine is the general medical care of hospitalized patients. Physicians whose primary professional focus is hospital medicine are called hospitalists in the United States and Canada. The term Most Responsible Physician (MRP) or attending physician is also used interchangeably to describe this role.
Laser medicine involves the use of lasers in the diagnostics or treatment of various conditions.
Many other health science fields, e.g. dietetics
Medical ethics deals with ethical and moral principles that apply values and judgments to the practice of medicine.
Medical humanities includes the humanities (literature, philosophy, ethics, history and religion), social science (anthropology, cultural studies, psychology, sociology), and the arts (literature, theater, film, and visual arts) and their application to medical education and practice.
Nosokinetics is the science/subject of measuring and modelling the process of care in health and social care systems.
Nosology is the classification of diseases for various purposes.
Occupational medicine is the provision of health advice to organizations and individuals to ensure that the highest standards of health and safety at work can be achieved and maintained.
Pain management (also called pain medicine, or algiatry) is the medical discipline concerned with the relief of pain.
Pharmacogenomics is a form of individualized medicine.
Podiatric medicine is the study of, diagnosis, and medical treatment of disorders of the foot, ankle, lower limb, hip and lower back.
Sexual medicine is concerned with diagnosing, assessing and treating all disorders related to sexuality.
Sports medicine deals with the treatment and prevention and rehabilitation of sports/exercise injuries such as muscle spasms, muscle tears, injuries to ligaments (ligament tears or ruptures) and their repair in athletes, amateur and professional.
Therapeutics is the field, more commonly referenced in earlier periods of history, of the various remedies that can be used to treat disease and promote health.[32]
Travel medicine or emporiatrics deals with health problems of international travelers or travelers across highly different environments.
Tropical medicine deals with the prevention and treatment of tropical diseases. It is studied separately in temperate climates where those diseases are quite unfamiliar to medical practitioners and their local clinical needs.
Urgent care focuses on delivery of unscheduled, walk-in care outside of the hospital emergency department for injuries and illnesses that are not severe enough to require care in an emergency department. In some jurisdictions this function is combined with the emergency department.
Veterinary medicine; veterinarians apply similar techniques as physicians to the care of non-human animals.
Wilderness medicine entails the practice of medicine in the wild, where conventional medical facilities may not be available.
Education and legal controls
Main articles: Medical education and Medical license

Medical students learning about stitches
Medical education and training varies around the world. It typically involves entry level education at a university medical school, followed by a period of supervised practice or internship, or residency. This can be followed by postgraduate vocational training. A variety of teaching methods have been employed in medical education, still itself a focus of active research. In Canada and the United States of America, a Doctor of Medicine degree, often abbreviated M.D., or a Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine degree, often abbreviated as D.O. and unique to the United States, must be completed in and delivered from a recognized university.

Since knowledge, techniques, and medical technology continue to evolve at a rapid rate, many regulatory authorities require continuing medical education. Medical practitioners upgrade their knowledge in various ways, including medical journals, seminars, conferences, and online programs. A database of objectives covering medical knowledge, as suggested by national societies across the United States, can be searched at http://data.medobjectives.marian.edu/ Archived 4 October 2018 at the Wayback Machine.[33]


Headquarters of the Organización Médica Colegial de España, which regulates the medical profession in Spain
In most countries, it is a legal requirement for a medical doctor to be licensed or registered. In general, this entails a medical degree from a university and accreditation by a medical board or an equivalent national organization, which may ask the applicant to pass exams. This restricts the considerable legal authority of the medical profession to physicians that are trained and qualified by national standards. It is also intended as an assurance to patients and as a safeguard against charlatans that practice inadequate medicine for personal gain. While the laws generally require medical doctors to be trained in "evidence based", Western, or Hippocratic Medicine, they are not intended to discourage different paradigms of health.

In the European Union, the profession of doctor of medicine is regulated. A profession is said to be regulated when access and exercise is subject to the possession of a specific professional qualification. The regulated professions database contains a list of regulated professions for doctor of medicine in the EU member states, EEA countries and Switzerland. This list is covered by the Directive 2005/36/EC.

Doctors who are negligent or intentionally harmful in their care of patients can face charges of medical malpractice and be subject to civil, criminal, or professional sanctions.

Medical ethics
Main article: Medical ethics

A 12th-century Byzantine manuscript of the Hippocratic Oath
Medical ethics is a system of moral principles that apply values and judgments to the practice of medicine. As a scholarly discipline, medical ethics encompasses its practical application in clinical settings as well as work on its history, philosophy, theology, and sociology. Six of the values that commonly apply to medical ethics discussions are:

autonomy – the patient has the right to refuse or choose their treatment. (Latin: Voluntas aegroti suprema lex.)
beneficence – a practitioner should act in the best interest of the patient. (Latin: Salus aegroti suprema lex.)
justice – concerns the distribution of scarce health resources, and the decision of who gets what treatment (fairness and equality).
non-maleficence – "first, do no harm" (Latin: primum non-nocere).
respect for persons – the patient (and the person treating the patient) have the right to be treated with dignity.
truthfulness and honesty – the concept of informed consent has increased in importance since the historical events of the Doctors' Trial of the Nuremberg trials, Tuskegee syphilis experiment, and others.
Values such as these do not give answers as to how to handle a particular situation, but provide a useful framework for understanding conflicts. When moral values are in conflict, the result may be an ethical dilemma or crisis. Sometimes, no good solution to a dilemma in medical ethics exists, and occasionally, the values of the medical community (i.e., the hospital and its staff) conflict with the values of the individual patient, family, or larger non-medical community. Conflicts can also arise between health care providers, or among family members. For example, some argue that the principles of autonomy and beneficence clash when patients refuse blood transfusions, considering them life-saving; and truth-telling was not emphasized to a large extent before the HIV era.

History
Main article: History of medicine
For a chronological guide, see Timeline of medicine and medical technology.

Statuette of ancient Egyptian physician Imhotep, the first physician from antiquity known by name
Ancient world
Prehistoric medicine incorporated plants (herbalism), animal parts, and minerals. In many cases these materials were used ritually as magical substances by priests, shamans, or medicine men. Well-known spiritual systems include animism (the notion of inanimate objects having spirits), spiritualism (an appeal to gods or communion with ancestor spirits); shamanism (the vesting of an individual with mystic powers); and divination (magically obtaining the truth). The field of medical anthropology examines the ways in which culture and society are organized around or impacted by issues of health, health care and related issues.

The earliest known medical texts in the world were found in the ancient Syrian city of Ebla and date back to 2500 BCE.[34][35][36] Other early records on medicine have been discovered from ancient Egyptian medicine, Babylonian Medicine, Ayurvedic medicine (in the Indian subcontinent), classical Chinese medicine (Alternative medicine) predecessor to the modern traditional Chinese medicine), and ancient Greek medicine and Roman medicine.

In Egypt, Imhotep (3rd millennium BCE) is the first physician in history known by name. The oldest Egyptian medical text is the Kahun Gynaecological Papyrus from around 2000 BCE, which describes gynaecological diseases. The Edwin Smith Papyrus dating back to 1600 BCE is an early work on surgery, while the Ebers Papyrus dating back to 1500 BCE is akin to a textbook on medicine.[37]

In China, archaeological evidence of medicine in Chinese dates back to the Bronze Age Shang dynasty, based on seeds for herbalism and tools presumed to have been used for surgery.[38] The Huangdi Neijing, the progenitor of Chinese medicine, is a medical text written beginning in the 2nd century BCE and compiled in the 3rd century.[39]

In India, the oldest known surgical text, the Sushruta Samhita written by the surgeon Sushruta, described numerous surgical operations, including the earliest forms of plastic surgery as well as methods of sterilization for surgical instruments.[40] The earliest records of dedicated hospitals come from Mihintale in Sri Lanka where evidence of dedicated medicinal treatment facilities for patients are found.[41][42]


Mosaic on the floor of the Asclepieion of Kos, depicting Hippocrates, with Asklepius in the middle (2nd–3rd century)
In Greece, the ancient Greek physician Hippocrates, the "father of modern medicine",[43][44] laid the foundation for a rational approach to medicine. Hippocrates introduced the Hippocratic Oath for physicians, which is still relevant and in use today, and was the first to categorize illnesses as acute, chronic, endemic and epidemic, and use terms such as, "exacerbation, relapse, resolution, crisis, paroxysm, peak, and convalescence".[45][46] The Greek physician Galen was also one of the greatest surgeons of the ancient world and performed many audacious operations, including brain and eye surgeries. After the fall of the Western Roman Empire and the onset of the Early Middle Ages, the Greek tradition of medicine went into decline in Western Europe, although it continued uninterrupted in the Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire.

Most of our knowledge of ancient Hebrew medicine during the 1st millennium BC comes from the Torah, i.e. the Five Books of Moses, which contain various health related laws and rituals. The Hebrew contribution to the development of modern medicine started in the Byzantine Era, with the physician Asaph the Jew.[47]

Middle Ages

A manuscript of Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah by Ali al-Ridha, the eighth Imam of Shia Muslims. The text says: "Golden dissertation in medicine which is sent by Imam Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha, peace be upon him, to al-Ma'mun."
The concept of hospital as institution to offer medical care and possibility of a cure for the patients due to the ideals of Christian charity, rather than just merely a place to die, appeared in the Byzantine Empire.[48]

Although the concept of uroscopy was known to Galen, he did not see the importance of using it to localize the disease. It was under the Byzantines with physicians such of Theophilus Protospatharius that they realized the potential in uroscopy to determine disease in a time when no microscope or stethoscope existed. That practice eventually spread to the rest of Europe.[49]

After 750 CE, the Muslim world had the works of Hippocrates, Galen and Sushruta translated into Arabic, and Islamic physicians engaged in some significant medical research. Notable Islamic medical pioneers include the Persian polymath, Avicenna, who, along with Imhotep and Hippocrates, has also been called the "father of medicine".[50] He wrote The Canon of Medicine which became a standard medical text at many medieval European universities,[51] considered one of the most famous books in the history of medicine.[52] Others include Abulcasis,[53] Avenzoar,[54] Ibn al-Nafis,[55] and Averroes.[56] Persian physician Rhazes[57] was one of the first to question the Greek theory of humorism, which nevertheless remained influential in both medieval Western and medieval Islamic medicine.[58] Some volumes of Rhazes's work Al-Mansuri, namely "On Surgery" and "A General Book on Therapy", became part of the medical curriculum in European universities.[59] Additionally, he has been described as a doctor's doctor,[60] the father of pediatrics,[57][61] and a pioneer of ophthalmology. For example, he was the first to recognize the reaction of the eye's pupil to light.[61] The Persian Bimaristan hospitals were an early example of public hospitals.[62][63]

In Europe, Charlemagne decreed that a hospital should be attached to each cathedral and monastery and the historian Geoffrey Blainey likened the activities of the Catholic Church in health care during the Middle Ages to an early version of a welfare state: "It conducted hospitals for the old and orphanages for the young; hospices for the sick of all ages; places for the lepers; and hostels or inns where pilgrims could buy a cheap bed and meal". It supplied food to the population during famine and distributed food to the poor. This welfare system the church funded through collecting taxes on a large scale and possessing large farmlands and estates. The Benedictine order was noted for setting up hospitals and infirmaries in their monasteries, growing medical herbs and becoming the chief medical care givers of their districts, as at the great Abbey of Cluny. The Church also established a network of cathedral schools and universities where medicine was studied. The Schola Medica Salernitana in Salerno, looking to the learning of Greek and Arab physicians, grew to be the finest medical school in medieval Europe.[64]


Siena's Santa Maria della Scala Hospital, one of Europe's oldest hospitals. During the Middle Ages, the Catholic Church established universities to revive the study of sciences, drawing on the learning of Greek and Arab physicians in the study of medicine.
However, the fourteenth and fifteenth century Black Death devastated both the Middle East and Europe, and it has even been argued that Western Europe was generally more effective in recovering from the pandemic than the Middle East.[b] In the early modern period, important early figures in medicine and anatomy emerged in Europe, including Gabriele Falloppio and William Harvey.

The major shift in medical thinking was the gradual rejection, especially during the Black Death in the 14th and 15th centuries, of what may be called the "traditional authority" approach to science and medicine. This was the notion that because some prominent person in the past said something must be so, then that was the way it was, and anything one observed to the contrary was an anomaly (which was paralleled by a similar shift in European society in general – see Copernicus's rejection of Ptolemy's theories on astronomy). Physicians like Vesalius improved upon or disproved some of the theories from the past. The main tomes used both by medicine students and expert physicians were Materia Medica and Pharmacopoeia.

Andreas Vesalius was the author of De humani corporis fabrica, an important book on human anatomy.[66] Bacteria and microorganisms were first observed with a microscope by Antonie van Leeuwenhoek in 1676, initiating the scientific field microbiology.[67] Independently from Ibn al-Nafis, Michael Servetus rediscovered the pulmonary circulation, but this discovery did not reach the public because it was written down for the first time in the "Manuscript of Paris"[68] in 1546, and later published in the theological work for which he paid with his life in 1553. Later this was described by Renaldus Columbus and Andrea Cesalpino. Herman Boerhaave is sometimes referred to as a "father of physiology" due to his exemplary teaching in Leiden and textbook 'Institutiones medicae' (1708). Pierre Fauchard has been called "the father of modern dentistry".[69]

Modern
"Modern medicine" redirects here. For the art exhibition, see Modern Medicine (art exhibition).

Paul-Louis Simond injecting a plague vaccine in Karachi, 1898
Veterinary medicine was, for the first time, truly separated from human medicine in 1761, when the French veterinarian Claude Bourgelat founded the world's first veterinary school in Lyon, France. Before this, medical doctors treated both humans and other animals.

Modern scientific biomedical research (where results are testable and reproducible) began to replace early Western traditions based on herbalism, the Greek "four humours" and other such pre-modern notions. The modern era really began with Edward Jenner's discovery of the smallpox vaccine at the end of the 18th century (inspired by the method of variolation originated in ancient China),[70] Robert Koch's discoveries around 1880 of the transmission of disease by bacteria, and then the discovery of antibiotics around 1900.

The post-18th century modernity period brought more groundbreaking researchers from Europe. From Germany and Austria, doctors Rudolf Virchow, Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen, Karl Landsteiner and Otto Loewi made notable contributions. In the United Kingdom, Alexander Fleming, Joseph Lister, Francis Crick and Florence Nightingale are considered important. Spanish doctor Santiago Ramón y Cajal is considered the father of modern neuroscience.

From New Zealand and Australia came Maurice Wilkins, Howard Florey, and Frank Macfarlane Burnet.

Others that did significant work include William Williams Keen, William Coley, James D. Watson (United States); Salvador Luria (Italy); Alexandre Yersin (Switzerland); Kitasato Shibasaburō (Japan); Jean-Martin Charcot, Claude Bernard, Paul Broca (France); Adolfo Lutz (Brazil); Nikolai Korotkov (Russia); Sir William Osler (Canada); and Harvey Cushing (United States).

As science and technology developed, medicine became more reliant upon medications. Throughout history and in Europe right until the late 18th century, not only plant products were used as medicine, but also animal (including human) body parts and fluids.[71] Pharmacology developed in part from herbalism and some drugs are still derived from plants (atropine, ephedrine, warfarin, aspirin, digoxin, vinca alkaloids,[72] taxol, hyoscine, etc.).[73] Vaccines were discovered by Edward Jenner and Louis Pasteur.

The first antibiotic was arsphenamine (Salvarsan) discovered by Paul Ehrlich in 1908 after he observed that bacteria took up toxic dyes that human cells did not. The first major class of antibiotics was the sulfa drugs, derived by German chemists originally from azo dyes.


Packaging of cardiac medicine at the Star pharmaceutical factory in Tampere, Finland in 1953
Pharmacology has become increasingly sophisticated; modern biotechnology allows drugs targeted towards specific physiological processes to be developed, sometimes designed for compatibility with the body to reduce side-effects. Genomics and knowledge of human genetics and human evolution is having increasingly significant influence on medicine, as the causative genes of most monogenic genetic disorders have now been identified, and the development of techniques in molecular biology, evolution, and genetics are influencing medical technology, practice and decision-making.

Evidence-based medicine is a contemporary movement to establish the most effective algorithms of practice (ways of doing things) through the use of systematic reviews and meta-analysis. The movement is facilitated by modern global information science, which allows as much of the available evidence as possible to be collected and analyzed according to standard protocols that are then disseminated to healthcare providers. The Cochrane Collaboration leads this movement. A 2001 review of 160 Cochrane systematic reviews revealed that, according to two readers, 21.3% of the reviews concluded insufficient evidence, 20% concluded evidence of no effect, and 22.5% concluded positive effect.[74]

Quality, efficiency, and access
Evidence-based medicine, prevention of medical error (and other "iatrogenesis"), and avoidance of unnecessary health care are a priority in modern medical systems. These topics generate significant political and public policy attention, particularly in the United States where healthcare is regarded as excessively costly but population health metrics lag similar nations.[75]

Globally, many developing countries lack access to care and access to medicines.[76] As of 2015, most wealthy developed countries provide health care to all citizens, with a few exceptions such as the United States where lack of health insurance coverage may limit access.[77]

Telemedicine
Main article: Telehealth
Telemedicine (also Telehealth) refers to preventive, promotive, and curative care delivery, including remote clinical services, such as diagnosis, monitoring, administration and provider education.[78][79] The main categories of telehealth:

Telenursing is experiencing significant growth globally due to factors such as the need to reduce healthcare costs, an increasing aging and chronically ill population, and expanded healthcare coverage to distant, rural, small, or sparsely populated regions. Telenursing can help address nurse shortages, reduce travel time and distances, and minimize hospital admissions.[80]
Telepalliative care is a remote approach to optimising quality of life and relieving suffering for people with serious, complex and often fatal illnesses. The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends integrating palliative care as early as possible for any chronic and fatal illness. Telepalliative care typically utilizes telecommunication technologies like video conferencing, messaging for follow-ups, and digital symptom assessments through questionnaires that generate alerts for healthcare professionals.[81]
Telepharmacy involves delivering pharmaceutical care via telecommunications to patients in locations where direct contact with a pharmacist may not be possible or difficult.[82]
Telepsychiatry (telemental health) uses telecommunications technology to provide remote psychiatric care for individuals with mental health conditions.[83]
Telepsychology is the use of communication technology for the remote administration of psychological tests and psychotherapy.[84]
Teleneurotherapy utilizes computers and communications technology to deliver neurotherapy remotely.[85] Research indicates that systematic physical stimuli from standard electronic devices, such as tablets with headphones, may treat injured nervous systems online by modulating neuronal plasticity. Evidence suggests that teleneurotherapy could enhance neurological treatment if it incorporates the therapeutic effect of a systematic abiotic impact of physical forces with key parameters of mother-fetus interaction. Recent research has shown therapeutic effects when implementing the APIN method in the online treatment of patients with various neurological conditions.[85][86][87][88]
Telenutrition refers to the use of video conferencing or telephony to provide online consultations by nutritionists or dieticians.[89]
Telerehabilitation (or e-rehabilitation) is the delivery of rehabilitation services over telecommunication networks and the Internet. Most services fall into two categories: clinical assessment (evaluating the patient's functional abilities in their environment) and clinical therapy.[90][91]
See also
icon	Medicine portal
Medicine
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Resources from Wikiversity
Further information: Outline of medicine, Outline of health, and Glossary of medicine
Alternative medicine – Unscientific healthcare practices
List of causes of death by rate
List of disorders
List of important publications in medicine
Lists of diseases
Medical aid – Type of insurance
Medical billing – Part of the US health system's reimbursement process
Medical classification – Use of schemes of standardized codes
Medical encyclopedia – Written compendium about diseases
Medical equipment – Device to be used for medical purposes
Medical ethics – System of moral principles of the practice of medicine
Medical literature – Scientific literature of medicine
Medical malpractice – Legal cause of action
Medical psychology – Application of psychological principles to the practice of medicine
Medical sociology – Branch of sociology
Philosophy of healthcare
Quackery – Promotion of fraudulent or ignorant medical practices
Telehealth
Traditional medicine – Formalized folk medicine
Zoopharmacognosy – Self-medication by animals
Notes
 Etymology: Latin: medicina, from ars medicina 'the medical art', from medicus 'physician'.[6] Cf. mederi 'to heal', etym.[clarification needed] 'know the best course for', from PIE base *med- 'to measure, limit'. Cf. Greek: medos 'counsel, plan', Avestan: vi-mad 'physician'
 Michael Dols has shown that the Black Death was much more commonly believed by European authorities than by Middle Eastern authorities to be contagious; as a result, flight was more commonly counseled, and in urban Italy quarantines were organized on a much wider level than in urban Egypt or Syria.[65]
References
 Firth J (2020). "Science in medicine: when, how, and what". Oxford textbook of medicine. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-874669-0.
 Saunders J (June 2000). "The practice of clinical medicine as an art and as a science". Med Humanit. 26 (1): 18–22. doi:10.1136/mh.26.1.18. ISSN 1468-215X. PMC 1071282. PMID 12484313. S2CID 73306806.
 "Dictionary, medicine". Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 2 December 2013.
 "Medicine, n.1". OED Online. Oxford University Press. September 2014. Archived from the original on 18 August 2021. Retrieved 8 November 2014.
 "Medicine". Oxford Dictionaries Online. Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 8 November 2014.
 "medicine". Etym.Online. Archived from the original on 11 October 2007.
 "Medicine". Online Etymology Dictionary. Archived from the original on 11 October 2007.
 "physic". Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/OED/6103370834. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.)
 "Traditional medicine: growing needs and potential". WHO Policy Perspectives on Medicines. No. 2. World Health Organization. 2002. hdl:10665/67294.
 El Dib RP, Atallah AN, Andriolo RB (August 2007). "Mapping the Cochrane evidence for decision making in health care". Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice. 13 (4): 689–692. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2753.2007.00886.x. PMID 17683315.
 Coulehan JL, Block MR (2005). The Medical Interview: Mastering Skills for Clinical Practice (5th ed.). F. A. Davis. ISBN 978-0-8036-1246-4. OCLC 232304023.
 Addison K, Braden JH, Cupp JE, Emmert D, Hall LA, Hall T, et al. (September 2005). "Update: guidelines for defining the legal health record for-disclosure purposes". Journal of AHIMA. 76 (8): 64A – 64G. PMID 16245584. Archived from the original on 9 March 2008.
 Nordqvist C (26 August 2009). "What Are Symptoms? What Are Signs?". Medical News Today. Archived from the original on 1 July 2014.
 "Assessing patients effectively: Here's how to do the basic four techniques". Nursing2014. 8 (2): 6. 2006. doi:10.1097/00152193-200611002-00005.
 "Clinical examination". The Free Dictionary. Archived from the original on 4 February 2021. Retrieved 18 January 2021.
 Grembowski DE, Diehr P, Novak LC, Roussel AE, Martin DP, Patrick DL, et al. (August 2000). "Measuring the "managedness" and covered benefits of health plans". Health Services Research. 35 (3): 707–734. PMC 1089144. PMID 10966092.
 Blainey G (2011). A Short History of Christianity. Penguin Viking. OCLC 793902685.[page needed]
 "Insuring America's Health: Principles and Recommendations". Institute of Medicine at the National Academies of Science. 14 January 2004. Archived from the original on 19 October 2009.
 Battista JR, McCabe J (4 June 1999). "The Case For Single Payer, Universal Health Care for the United States". Cthealth.server101.com. Archived from the original on 23 April 2018. Retrieved 4 May 2009.
 Sipkoff M (January 2004). "Transparency called key to uniting cost control, quality improvement". Managed Care. 13 (1): 38–42. PMID 14763279. Archived from the original on 17 February 2004. Retrieved 16 April 2006.
 Calnan M (2015). Collyer F (ed.). "Eliot Freidson: Sociological Narratives of Professionalism and Modern Medicine". The Palgrave Handbook of Social Theory in Health, Illness and Medicine. London: Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp. 287–305. doi:10.1057/9781137355621_19. ISBN 978-1-349-47022-8. Archived from the original on 14 March 2022. Retrieved 6 November 2021.
 "Primary, Secondary and Tertiary HealthCare – Arthapedia". www.arthapedia.in. Archived from the original on 28 January 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2021.
 "Types of health care providers: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia". medlineplus.gov. Archived from the original on 23 January 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2021.
 "Secondary Health Care". International Medical Corps. Archived from the original on 17 January 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2021.
 Laokri S, Weil O, Drabo KM, Dembelé SM, Kafando B, Dujardin B (April 2013). "Removal of user fees no guarantee of universal health coverage: observations from Burkina Faso". Bulletin of the World Health Organization. 91 (4): 277–282. doi:10.2471/BLT.12.110015. PMC 3629451. PMID 23599551.
 Chou YJ, Yip WC, Lee CH, Huang N, Sun YP, Chang HJ (September 2003). "Impact of separating drug prescribing and dispensing on provider behaviour: Taiwan's experience". Health Policy and Planning. 18 (3): 316–329. doi:10.1093/heapol/czg038. PMID 12917273.
 "What are the surgical specialties?". American College of Surgeons. Archived from the original on 22 January 2021. Retrieved 18 January 2021.
 Culyer AJ (31 July 2014). The Dictionary of Health Economics, Third Edition. Chelthenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing. p. 335. ISBN 978-1-78100-199-8. Archived from the original on 18 August 2021. Retrieved 18 January 2021.
 "internal medicine" at Dorland's Medical Dictionary
 Fowler HW (1994). A Dictionary of Modern English Usage (Wordsworth Collection) (Wordsworth Collection). NTC/Contemporary Publishing Company. ISBN 978-1-85326-318-7.
 "The Royal Australasian College of Physicians: What are Physicians?". Royal Australasian College of Physicians. Archived from the original on 6 March 2008. Retrieved 5 February 2008.
 "therapeutics (medicine)". Britannica Online Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on 18 December 2007. Retrieved 21 April 2012.
 Brooks S, Biala N, Arbor S (March 2018). "A searchable database of medical education objectives – creating a comparable gold standard". BMC Medical Education. 18 (1) 31. doi:10.1186/s12909-018-1136-z. PMC 5833091. PMID 29499684.
 Radner K, Robson E (22 September 2011). The Oxford Handbook of Cuneiform Culture. OUP Oxford. ISBN 978-0-19-955730-1. Archived from the original on 27 February 2024. Retrieved 26 December 2023.
 Vogel WH, Berke A (2009). Brief History of Vision and Ocular Medicine. Kugler Publications. ISBN 978-90-6299-220-1. Archived from the original on 27 February 2024. Retrieved 26 December 2023.
 Page(5) https://www.asor.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Five_Articles_about_Drugs_Medicine__Alcohol_From_ANEToday_E-book.pdf Archived 20 January 2024 at the Wayback Machine
 Ackerknecht E (1982). A Short History of Medicine. JHU Press. p. 22. ISBN 978-0-8018-2726-6.
 Hong F (2004). "History of Medicine in China" (PDF). McGill Journal of Medicine. 8 (1): 7984. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 December 2013.
 Unschuld P (2003). Huang Di Nei Jing: Nature, Knowledge, Imagery in an Ancient Chinese Medical Text. University of California Press. p. ix. ISBN 978-0-520-92849-7. Archived from the original on 18 April 2016. Retrieved 14 November 2015.
 Dave T, Habte A, Vora V, Sheikh MQ, Sanker V, Gopal SV (5 April 2024). "Sushruta: The Father of Indian Surgical History". Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery - Global Open. 12 (4): e5715. doi:10.1097/GOX.0000000000005715. ISSN 2169-7574. PMC 11000756. PMID 38596573.
 Aluvihare A (November 1993). "Rohal Kramaya Lovata Dhayadha Kale Sri Lankikayo". Vidhusara Science Magazine: 5.
 Rannan-Eliya RP, De Mel N (9 February 1997). "Resource mobilization in Sri Lanka's health sector" (PDF). Harvard School of Public Health & Health Policy Programme, Institute of Policy Studies. p. 19. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 October 2001. Retrieved 16 July 2009.
 Grammaticos PC, Diamantis A (2008). "Useful known and unknown views of the father of modern medicine, Hippocrates and his teacher Democritus". Hellenic Journal of Nuclear Medicine. 11 (1): 2–4. PMID 18392218.
 The father of modern medicine: the first research of the physical factor of tetanus Archived 18 November 2011 at the Wayback Machine, European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases
 Garrison FH (1966). History of Medicine. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Company. p. 97.
 Martí-Ibáñez F (1961). A Prelude to Medical History. New York: MD Publications, Inc. p. 90. Library of Congress ID: 61-11617.
 Vaisrub S, A Denman M, Naparstek Y, Gilon D (2008). "Medicine". Encyclopaedia Judaica. The Gale Group. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015. Retrieved 27 August 2014.
 Lindberg D (1992). The Beginnings of Western Science. University of Chicago Press. p. 349. ISBN 978-0-226-48231-6.
 Prioreschi P (2004). A History of Medicine: Byzantine and Islamic medicine. Horatius Press. p. 146.
 Becka J (January 1980). "[The father of medicine, Avicenna, in our science and culture. Abu Ali ibn Sina (980–1037)]". Casopis Lekaru Ceskych (in Czech). 119 (1): 17–23. PMID 6989499.
 "Avicenna 980–1037". Hcs.osu.edu. Archived from the original on 7 October 2008. Retrieved 19 January 2010.
 ""The Canon of Medicine" (work by Avicenna)". Encyclopædia Britannica. 2008. Archived from the original on 28 May 2008. Retrieved 11 June 2008.
 Ahmad Z (2007). "Al-Zahrawi – The Father of Surgery". ANZ Journal of Surgery. 77 (Suppl. 1): A83. doi:10.1111/j.1445-2197.2007.04130_8.x. S2CID 57308997.
 Abdel-Halim RE (November 2006). "Contributions of Muhadhdhab Al-Deen Al-Baghdadi to the progress of medicine and urology. A study and translations from his book Al-Mukhtar". Saudi Medical Journal. 27 (11): 1631–1641. PMID 17106533.
 "Chairman's Reflections: Traditional Medicine Among Gulf Arabs, Part II: Blood-letting". Heart Views. 5 (2): 74–85 [80]. 2004. Archived from the original on 8 March 2013.
 Martín-Araguz A, Bustamante-Martínez C, Fernández-Armayor Ajo V, Moreno-Martínez JM (1 May 2002). "[Neuroscience in Al Andalus and its influence on medieval scholastic medicine]". Revista de Neurología (in Spanish). 34 (9): 877–892. doi:10.33588/rn.3409.2001382. PMID 12134355.
 Tschanz DW (2003). "Arab(?) Roots of European Medicine". Heart Views. 4 (2). Archived from the original on 3 May 2004. Retrieved 9 June 2013. copy Archived 30 November 2004 at the Wayback Machine
 Pormann PE, Savage-Smith E (2007). "On the dominance of the Greek humoral theory, which was the basis for the practice of bloodletting". Medieval Islamic medicine. Washington DC: Georgetown University. pp. 10, 43–45. OL 12911905W.
 Iskandar A (2006). "Al-Rāzī". Encyclopaedia of the history of science, technology, and medicine in non-western cultures (2nd ed.). Springer. pp. 155–156.
 Ganchy S (2008). Islam and Science, Medicine, and Technology. New York: Rosen Pub.
 Elgood C (2010). A Medical History of Persia and The Eastern Caliphate (1st ed.). London: Cambridge. pp. 202–203. ISBN 978-1-108-01588-2. By writing a monograph on 'Diseases in Children' he may also be looked upon as the father of paediatrics.
 Micheau F (1996). "The Scientific Institutions in the Medieval Near East". In Rashed R, Morelon R (eds.). Encyclopedia of the History of Arabic Science. Routledge. pp. 991–992.
 Barrett P (2004). Science and Theology Since Copernicus: The Search for Understanding. Continuum International Publishing Group. p. 18. ISBN 978-0-567-08969-4.
 Blainey G (2011). A Short History of Christianity. Penguin Viking. pp. 214–215. OCLC 793902685.
 Dols MW (1977). The Black Death in the Middle East. Princeton. pp. 119, 285–290. OCLC 2296964.
 "Page through a virtual copy of Vesalius's De Humanis Corporis Fabrica". Archive.nlm.nih.gov. Archived from the original on 11 October 2014. Retrieved 21 April 2012.
 Madigan M, Martinko J, eds. (2006). Brock Biology of Microorganisms (11th ed.). Prentice Hall. ISBN 978-0-13-144329-7.
 Michael Servetus Research Archived 13 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine Website with a graphical study on the Manuscript of Paris by Servetus
 Lynch CD, O'Sullivan VR, McGillycuddy CT (December 2006). "Pierre Fauchard: the 'father of modern dentistry'". British Dental Journal. 201 (12): 779–781. doi:10.1038/sj.bdj.4814350. PMID 17183395.
 Williams G (2010). Angel of Death. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-230-27471-6.
 Cooper P (2004). "Medicinal properties of body parts". The Pharmaceutical Journal. 273 (7330): 900–902. Archived from the original on 3 December 2008.
 van Der Heijden R, Jacobs DI, Snoeijer W, Hallard D, Verpoorte R (March 2004). "The Catharanthus alkaloids: pharmacognosy and biotechnology". Current Medicinal Chemistry. 11 (5): 607–628. doi:10.2174/0929867043455846. PMID 15032608.
 Atanasov AG, Waltenberger B, Pferschy-Wenzig EM, Linder T, Wawrosch C, Uhrin P, et al. (December 2015). "Discovery and resupply of pharmacologically active plant-derived natural products: A review". Biotechnology Advances. 33 (8): 1582–1614. doi:10.1016/j.biotechadv.2015.08.001. PMC 4748402. PMID 26281720.
 Ezzo J, Bausell B, Moerman DE, Berman B, Hadhazy V (2001). "Reviewing the reviews. How strong is the evidence? How clear are the conclusions?". International Journal of Technology Assessment in Health Care. 17 (4): 457–466. doi:10.1017/S0266462301107014. PMID 11758290. S2CID 21855086.
 Bentley TG, Effros RM, Palar K, Keeler EB (December 2008). "Waste in the U.S. Health care system: a conceptual framework". The Milbank Quarterly. 86 (4): 629–659. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0009.2008.00537.x. PMC 2690367. PMID 19120983.
 "WHO | Tracking universal health coverage: 2017 Global Monitoring Report". WHO. Archived from the original on 8 October 2020. Retrieved 14 June 2019.
 "Coverage for health care | READ online". OECD iLibrary. 4 November 2015. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 14 June 2019.
 "What is TeleHealth?". Office for the Advancement of Telehealth. The Health Resources and Services Administration. July 2025. Retrieved 6 July 2025.
 Shaw DK (June 2009). "Overview of telehealth and its application to cardiopulmonary physical therapy". Cardiopulmonary Physical Therapy Journal. 20 (2): 13–8. doi:10.1097/01823246-200920020-00003. PMC 2845264. PMID 20467533.
 "Nurses Happier Using Telecare, Says International Survey". eHealth Insider. 15 June 2005. Archived from the original on 18 June 2006. Retrieved 4 April 2009.
 Finucane AM, O'Donnell H, Lugton J, Gibson-Watt T, Swenson C, Pagliari C (6 April 2021). "Digital health interventions in palliative care: a systematic meta-review". npj Digital Medicine. 4 (1): 64. doi:10.1038/s41746-021-00430-7. ISSN 2398-6352. PMC 8024379. PMID 33824407.
 Lowry SJ, Kay CN, Marsom EN, Park JS, Poole S, Page AT (2020). "Optimising health outcomes via pharmacist delivered telehealth medicines management: a systematic review". Journal of Pharmacy Practice and Research. 50 (5). Wiley: 377–390. doi:10.1002/jppr.1695. ISSN 1445-937X. S2CID 225070505.
 Schuster R, Fischer E, Jansen C, Napravnik N, Rockinger S, Steger N, et al. (2022). "Blending Internet-based and tele group treatment: Acceptability, effects, and mechanisms of change of cognitive behavioral treatment for depression". Internet Interventions. 29 100551. doi:10.1016/j.invent.2022.100551. PMC 9204733. PMID 35722084.
 Wadsworth HE, Dhima K, Womack KB, Hart J, Weiner MF, Hynan LS, et al. (December 2018). "Validity of Teleneuropsychological Assessment in Older Patients with Cognitive Disorders". Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology. 33 (8): 1040–1045. doi:10.1093/arclin/acx140. PMC 6887729. PMID 29329363.
 Val Danilov I, Medne D, Mihailova S (3 July 2025). "Natural Neurostimulation for Chronic Pain Management: A Case Series of 3 Patients with Dysmenorrhea and Menstrual Migraine". OBM Neurobiology. 09 (3): 1–11. doi:10.21926/obm.neurobiol.2503290.
 Val Danilov I, Medne D, Mihailova S (January 2025). "Modulating neuroplasticity with acoustic photonic intellectual neurostimulation (APIN): a case study on neurodegenerative disorder". Brain Stimulation. 18 (1): 561. doi:10.1016/j.brs.2024.12.1005.
 Mihailova S, Medne D, Val Danilov I (January 2025). "Acoustic photonic intellectual neurostimulation (APIN) in dysmenorrhea management: a case study on an adolescent". Brain Stimulation. 18 (1): 510. doi:10.1016/j.brs.2024.12.860.
 Medne D, Val Danilov I, Mihailova S (January 2025). "The effect of acoustic and photonic intervention combined with mental load on chronic headaches: a case study". Brain Stimulation. 18 (1): 542–543. doi:10.1016/j.brs.2024.12.955.
 Costantino A, Roncoroni L, Noviello D, Nandi N, Lombardo V, Scricciolo A, et al. (13 April 2021). "Nutritional and Gastroenterological Monitoring of Patients With Celiac Disease During COVID-19 Pandemic: The Emerging Role of Telemedicine and Point-of-Care Gluten Detection Tests". Frontiers in Nutrition. 8 622514. doi:10.3389/fnut.2021.622514. PMC 8076748. PMID 33928109.
 E-health care information systems: an introduction for students and professionals. John Wiley and Sons. 2005. p. 219. ISBN 978-0-7879-6618-8.
 Keaton L, Pierce LL, Steiner V, Lance K (October 2004). "An E-rehabilitation Team Helps Caregivers Deal with Stroke". The Internet Journal of Allied Health Sciences and Practice. 2 (4). Ijahsp.nova.edu. ISSN 1540-580X. Retrieved 26 March 2011.

